#summary Install rattle on Microsoft Windows.

= Steps =

  * Download and install GTK+ (2.22.0 is 7.8MB) from [http://downloads.sourceforge.net/gtk-win/gtk2-runtime-2.22.0-2010-10-21-ash.exe Sourceforge]. The Graphical User Interface (GUI) is implemented using Gtk. Gtk is a separate package to R.

  * Download and install R (2.12.0 is 37MB) from [http://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/R-2.12.0-win.exe CRAN], the Comprehensive R Archive Network. Choosing all the defaults on the install works just fine.

  * Install Rattle by opening the R Desktop icon and enter the `install.packages("rattle")` command at the R prompt. R asks us to nominate a CRAN mirror. Choose a nearby location.

  * Start Rattle by opening the R Desktop icon and then enter the following two commands at the R prompt. First load the Rattle package with `library(rattle)` and then start up Rattle with `rattle()`.

= Options =

The following can also be installed as you see fit.

  * We can install other packages Rattle uses. Rattle will notice these packages missing when we try to use some functionality dependent on the package. If so, then Rattle will offer to install them. However, we can install them all now if we might not always be connected to the Internet. We might need to restart R to be able to reinstall Rattle. 
<pre>
> install.packages("rattle", dep=c("Suggests"))
</pre>

  * Download and install GGobi (2.1.8 is 807KB) from: 
http://www.ggobi.org/downloads/ggobi-2.1.8.exe

Optional: You may like to install Emacs Speaks S, a comprehensive environment for writing R code on MS/Windows. Download and install the latest version available (39.9MB) from: 
http://vgoulet.act.ulaval.ca/en/ressources/emacs/windows.

Alternative Option: You may like to install Tinn-R - a more traditional GUI based IDE for R (3.94MB) from: 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/tinn-r